.Dd March 26, 2022
.Dt BATCH 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm batch
.Nd A tool for batch processing using your favorite text editor.
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Ar switches
.Op Fl -
.Op Ar arguments
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
is a tool that takes a list of items, lets you edit the list in your favorite text editor,
then generates a shell script to batch process unchanged items, renamed items, and deleted items.
You can edit the script to add your own logic for how to process each kind of item, and then run it.
.Pp
By default, the
.Nm
utility reads a list of items from standard input
and writes unchanged items, renamed items, and deleted items to standard output.
.Pp
In addition to interactive use,
you can supply shell script fragments to automate the editing and batch processing stages.
.Sh USAGE
Run the following in your terminal.
.Bd -literal -offset indent
batch *
.Ed
.Pp
The above is equivalent to:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
ls | batch
.Ed
.Pp
This command opens the directory contents in an external editor.
.Pp
Alternatively, enter
.Nm
in your terminal, paste the following text and hit
.Ql Control+D .
.Bd -literal -offset indent
Star Platinum.png
Magician's Red.png
Hermit Purple.png
Hierophant Green.png
Silver Chariot.png
The Fool.png
.Ed
.Pp
You can also create these files with the
.Ql batch -E -p touch
command.
.Pp
After you edit and save the file, it will generate a shell script
which does the specified actions according to the changes you did in the file.
.Pp
Edited file:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
star-platinum.png

hermit-purple.png

silver-chariot.png

.Ed
.Pp
Generated shell script:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
# This file will be executed when you close the editor.
# Please double-check everything, clear the file to abort.

# Action on unchanged items.
pick() {
  echo "$1"
}

# Action on modified items.
map() {
  echo "$1" "$2"
}
map 'Star Platinum.png' 'star-platinum.png'
map 'Hermit Purple.png' 'hermit-purple.png'
map 'Silver Chariot.png' 'silver-chariot.png'

# Action on deleted items.
drop() {
  echo "$1"
}
drop 'Magician'"'"'s Red.png'
drop 'Hierophant Green.png'
drop 'The Fool.png'
.Ed
.Pp
This shell script is opened in an editor for you to review.
After you close it, it will be executed.
.Ss Editor configuration
By default,
.Nm
uses whatever you’ve set as your default text editor via one of the
.Ev VISUAL
or
.Ev EDITOR
environment variables, or else falls back to the
.Xr vi 1
editor to process items.
.Pp
To change that default to something else, you can use the
.Fl -editor
option:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
batch -e vim
.Ed
.Pp
Now, no matter what is set as your default shell editor,
.Nm
will fire up
.Xr vim 1
to process items.
.Ss Advanced usage
.Nm
lets you apply external filters—such as
.Xr tr 1 ,
.Xr sed 1
or
.Xr awk 1 Ns
—before invoking the editor:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
batch -f 'sed "s/ /-/g"'
.Ed
.Pp
This option can be used to ease your editing.
.Pp
Combined with the
.Fl -no-edit
flag,
.Nm
can be fully automated:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
batch -f 'sed "s/ /-/g"' -E -m 'echo mv -vi --'
.Ed
.Pp
Finally, you might want to specify a shell script for your actions:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
batch -M 'mkdir -vp -- "$(dirname -- "$2")" && mv -vi -- "$1" "$2"'
.Ed
.Pp
This command allows you to automatically create the destination directory when renaming files.
.Ss "In practice?"
Depending on my situation here are the tools I use:
.Pp
.Bl -dash -compact
.It
I use
.Xr kak 1
to edit items and
.Xr tr 1 /
.Xr iconv 1
for pre-editing.
.It
I use
.Xr fd 1
to find entries.
.It
I use
.Xr nnn 1
to select files.
.El
.Pp
Since
.Nm
does not try to load config files from a specific folder at startup,
the best way to emulate this is by creating an alias in your shell profile.
.Pp
Here is my personal configuration:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
# interactive mv
imv() {
  batch -e 'kak' -f 'iconv -f "UTF-8" -t "ASCII//TRANSLIT//IGNORE"' -f 'tr "A-Z" "a-z"' -f 'tr -s " '"'"'" "-"' -f 'tr -d "!,?"' -p ':' -M 'mkdir -vp -- "$(dirname -- "$2")" && mv -vi -- "$1" "$2"' -d 'rm -vi --' "$@"
}

# graphical mv
xmv() {
  nnn -p - | imv "$@"
}
.Ed
.Sh EXAMPLES
Process files in the current working directory.
.Bd -literal -offset indent
batch *
.Ed
.Pp
Process files from
.Ql argv .
.Bd -literal -offset indent
batch *.png
.Ed
.Pp
Process files from
.Pa stdin .
.Bd -literal -offset indent
find . -type f | batch
.Ed
.Sh OPTIONS
The options are as follows:
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Fl p Ar command , Fl -pick-command Ns = Ns Ar command
Specifies the
.Ar command
to run on unchanged items.
.Pp
Default is
.Xr echo 1 .
.It Fl m Ar command , Fl -map-command Ns = Ns Ar command
Specifies the
.Ar command
to run on modified items.
.Pp
Default is
.Xr echo 1 .
.It Fl d Ar command , Fl -drop-command Ns = Ns Ar command
Specifies the
.Ar command
to run on deleted items.
.Pp
Default is
.Xr echo 1 .
.It Fl P Ar command , Fl -pick-shell-script Ns = Ns Ar command
Specifies the shell script to run on unchanged items.
.It Fl M Ar command , Fl -map-shell-script Ns = Ns Ar command
Specifies the shell script to run on modified items.
.It Fl D Ar command , Fl -drop-shell-script Ns = Ns Ar command
Specifies the shell script to run on deleted items.
.It Fl e Ar command , Fl -editor Ns = Ns Ar command
Specifies the editor to use.
.Pp
The order of preference is the
.Ev VISUAL
environment variable, then the
.Ev EDITOR
environment variable, and then the default chosen at compile time, which is usually
.Xr vi 1 .
.It Fl f Ar command , Fl -filter Ns = Ns Ar command
Adds a filter
.Pq repeatable .
.It Fl E , Fl -no-edit
Do not open editor.
.It Fl -no-pick
Do not pick items.
.It Fl -no-map
Do not map items.
.It Fl -no-drop
Do not drop items.
.It Fl
Read items from
.Pa stdin .
.It Fl h , Fl -help
Show this help.
.It Fl v , Fl -version
Show version.
.El
.Sh ENVIRONMENT
The following environment variables have an effect on
.Nm .
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Ev VISUAL , Ev EDITOR
Configures the default text editor.
.El
.Sh CONTRIBUTING
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Report bugs on the
.Lk https://github.com/taupiqueur/batch/issues issue tracker ,
.It ask questions on the
.Lk https://web.libera.chat/gamja/#taupiqueur IRC channel ,
.It send patches on the
.Lk https://github.com/taupiqueur/batch/pulls mailing list .
.El
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Mathieu Ablasou Aq Mt taupiqueur.kanto@gmail.com
